feat: article, googleworkspace module and managing (#66)
masterpointio/masterpoint.io: content/blog/managing-google-workspace-with-terraform.md

callout: <p>👋 <b>If you're ready to take your infrastructure to the next level, we're here to help. We love to work together with engineering teams to help them build well-documented, scalable, automated IaC that make their jobs easier. <a href='/contact'>Get in touch!</a>
---

## Table of Contents

- [Growing Pains](#growing-pains)
- [Why This Matters for Scaling Teams](#why-this-matters-for-scaling-teams)
- [Managing Google Workspace with Terraform](#managing-google-workspace-with-terraform)
- [Getting Started With the Module](#getting-started-with-the-module)
- [Module Design Decisions](#module-design-decisions)
  - [Implementing Integration and Validation Tests](#design-decision-1---implementing-integration-and-validation-tests)
  - [Choosing Intuitive Terraform Variable Structure](#design-decision-2---choosing-intuitive-terraform-variable-structure)
- [Wrapping Up](#wrapping-up)

## Growing Pains

As Masterpoint has been around for almost 10 years now, we've experienced growing pains transitioning from a one-person consultancy to a small team of core full-time engineers, with the help of additional contractors when needed.

> During that time, we've focused on client projects more than our own internal systems. When I joined in December, we started to feel the friction of onboarding a new Google Workspace user more acutely. Matt (CEO/CTO) had to remember what permissions a new Google Workspace user gets by default, how to provision SSO permissions for Masterpoint's AWS Accounts, and how to get a user set up for client-specific SSOs. Since he hadn't gone through that process in 6 months, he forgot some important details, which resulted in delayed access to the Masterpoint AWS accounts and took time away from his ability to focus on other work due to tedious administrative tasks.

Author: Went with the list approach and make the suggested edits there.

## Why This Matters for Scaling Teams

In our small company and possibly in your own organization, it's not a big deal for the founder or early engineer to create a new employee's Google Workspace account or give them SSO account access via the Admin UI. But as a company scales:

- Founders or engineers are (hopefully) focused on product, customers, and strategy.
- Nobody remembers why or when a permission was changed.
- Group membership becomes inconsistent.
- Onboarding/offboarding gets slower and error-prone.

> - The stakes for getting security permissions correct increase.

Author: yep, better wording choice.

> As a company grows past 10, dozens, or 100+ people, teams (and dare we say departments) become more distributed and harder to manage across many different SaaS tools. It's important to have systems in place that provide clarity and enable individuals to get the right work done in a timely manner. We believe efficient systems are part of a company evolving into higher levels of organizational maturity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a company grows past ten, dozens, or a hundred people, teams (and dare we say departments) become more distributed. It is harder to manage user accounts across many different SaaS tools. It's important to have systems in place that provide clarity and enable individuals to get the right access to get their work done in a timely manner. We believe efficient systems are part of a company evolving toward higher levels of organizational maturity. 

One aspect of that is finding a better way to manager your Google Workspace accounts.
```

## Managing Google Workspace with Terraform

We looked at a couple of open source solutions and decided on using the Terraform [Google Workspace](https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform-provider-googleworkspace) provider. We often use SaaS-specific Terraform providers to provision user accounts for DataDog and other SaaS services, so this was an easy decision.

> We heard great things about [GAM](https://github.com/GAM-team/GAM) (an imperative command line tool) from a few colleagues, but we didn't need its full range of capabilities and prefer to use declarative systems so we know the user account and group settings we see in config files are indeed the values in production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We heard great things about [GAM](https://github.com/GAM-team/GAM) (an imperative command line tool) from a few colleagues, but we didn't need its full range of capabilities. We prefer to use declarative systems so we know the user account and group settings we see in config files are indeed the values in production.
```

> In terms of using the provider, while there are a few Terraform modules out there for managing Google Workspaces, we decided to create our own Terraform module. The motivation to build a new module from scratch stemmed from our desire to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While there are a few Terraform modules out there for managing Google Workspaces, we decided to create our own Terraform module to use the provider. The motivation to build a module from scratch stemmed from our desire to:
```

> 1. Democratize user onboarding powers so Matt (CEO/CTO) is not a bottleneck.

Reviewer: These are all good things, but wouldn't they be available with any module? Was there some reason you needed to write a module from scratch to achieve these?

Also, you already mentioned Matt is the CEO/CTO, so I'd remove that parenthetical.

Author: That's good feedback. From a pure engineering focus, 3 and 4 were the motivations for building our own module. Other modules ignored and overrode the SSO settings and we walk through the intuitive set up in the design decision. I think I'll remove 1/2 and add another more technical motivation.

2. Provide transparency and history for changes to our team's permissions.
3. Easily manage SSO configurations allowing engineers to sign into multiple AWS accounts using their Google Identity.
4. Intuitively organize user and team settings in a clear and straight forward approach.

> Here's the GitHub link for the Google Workspace module:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's the GitHub link for our Google Workspace module:  
```

[https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation)

## Getting Started With the Module

> To make the module easy to get up and running with your own Google Workspace, we included two practical on-ramps for existing and brand new Google Workspaces:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make the module easy to get up and running with your own Google Workspace, we included two practical on-ramps:
```

1. **Import an existing Google Workspace**  

>    We shared the [terraform code](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation/blob/main/examples/import-existing-org/main.tf) we used to declare existing [users](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation/blob/main/examples/import-existing-org/users.yaml) and [groups](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation/blob/main/examples/import-existing-org/groups.yaml) in YAML, and the [import blocks](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation/blob/main/examples/import-existing-org/imports.tf) to easily import an existing setup. We additionally shared a [Python script](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation/blob/main/examples/import-existing-org/debugging-script.py) to view the JSON of your existing resources (which you could give to an LLM and tell it to follow the example to create your own `users.yaml` and `groups.yaml` files)..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   We shared the [terraform code](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation/blob/main/examples/import-existing-org/main.tf) we used to declare existing [users](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation/blob/main/examples/import-existing-org/users.yaml) and [groups](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation/blob/main/examples/import-existing-org/groups.yaml) in YAML, and the [import blocks](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation/blob/main/examples/import-existing-org/imports.tf) to easily import an existing setup. We additionally shared a [Python script](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation/blob/main/examples/import-existing-org/debugging-script.py) which lets you view the JSON of your existing resources. When you have that, you can give it to an LLM and tell it to create your own `users.yaml` and `groups.yaml` files).
```

Reviewer: I'm not sure I entirely captured what you were saying. Why exactly would you feed the existing JSON to an LLM to produce the YAML?

Author: I changed over the content to introducing the import and pivoted away from the original working. Marking this as resolved.

>    We shared the [terraform code](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation/blob/main/examples/import-existing-org/main.tf) we used to declare existing [users](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation/blob/main/examples/import-existing-org/users.yaml) and [groups](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation/blob/main/examples/import-existing-org/groups.yaml) in YAML, and the [import blocks](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation/blob/main/examples/import-existing-org/imports.tf) to easily import an existing setup. We additionally shared a [Python script](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation/blob/main/examples/import-existing-org/debugging-script.py) to view the JSON of your existing resources (which you could give to an LLM and tell it to follow the example to create your own `users.yaml` and `groups.yaml` files)..

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   We shared the [Terraform code](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation/blob/main/examples/import-existing-org/main.tf) we used to declare existing [users](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation/blob/main/examples/import-existing-org/users.yaml) and [groups](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation/blob/main/examples/import-existing-org/groups.yaml) in YAML, and the [import blocks](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation/blob/main/examples/import-existing-org/imports.tf) to easily import an existing setup. We additionally shared a [Python script](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation/blob/main/examples/import-existing-org/debugging-script.py) to view the JSON of your existing resources (which you could give to an LLM and tell it to follow the example to create your own `users.yaml` and `groups.yaml` files).
```

Reviewer 2: hmm Git isn't showing the diff, but the suggestion capitalizes the T in terraform and removes additional . at the end

Author: After making some content changes, capitalized Terraform.

> 2. **Create New Resources**  

Reviewer: I'd make this the same type of capitalization as the point 1 (or change point 1 to have the same as this). 

Does every word in the header get capitalized (as here) or not (as in point 1).

>    Start fresh by managing Google Workspace users and groups directly from Terraform. This is a great starting point if you're setting up a new org or moving toward automation-first infra practices.

Reviewer: How is this an onramp?

Author: Valid point. Updated sentance to describe (1) and (2) as examples, not on ramps.

After the initial import or setup, your Google Workspace [root module](https://newsletter.masterpoint.io/p/multi-instance-vs-single-instance-root-modules) could end up being as simple as this:

```terraform
locals {
  oauth_scopes = [
    "https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.group",
    "https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.user",
    "https://www.googleapis.com/auth/admin.directory.userschema",
    "https://www.googleapis.com/auth/apps.groups.settings",
    "https://www.googleapis.com/auth/iam",
  ]
}

provider "googleworkspace" {

>   customer_id             = "my_customer"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  customer_id             = "my_company"
```

isn't this example in the context of the user's company?

Author: Good call out. The `my_customer` is actually a specific setting for the underlying Google Workspace API and should remain `my_customer`. I'm sure others will have the same question. I'll add a comment briefly alluding to this (technical docs on github explicitly cover this).

  credentials             = local.secrets["googleworkspace_admin_credentials_json"]
  impersonated_user_email = var.impersonated_user_email
  oauth_scopes            = local.oauth_scopes
}

> # Get users and groups from YAML files. You might choose to use other config file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Get users and groups from YAML files. You might choose to use other config files.
```

# Note: path.module refers to the directory where terraform/tofu plan/apply is run
# var.googleworkspace_configs is a variable for the directory containing config files
locals {
  config_path = "${path.module}/${var.googleworkspace_configs}"

>   all_groups = yamldecode(file("${local.config_path}/groups.yaml"))

Reviewer: Would you commit these YAML files? I imagine so. Might be worth talking more about them, maybe giving an example?

  all_users  = yamldecode(file("${local.config_path}/users.yaml"))

  # Skip objects that start with "_", which we use as default or prototype objects
  groups = { for k, v in local.all_groups : k => v if !startswith(k, "_") }
  users  = { for k, v in local.all_users : k => v if !startswith(k, "_") }
}

module "googleworkspace_users_groups" {
  source  = "masterpointio/users-groups-automation/googleworkspace"

>   version = "X.X.X"

Reviewer: does this mean "specify a version, but we aren't because this is example code?" That's what I took it to mean.

  groups  = local.groups
  users   = local.users
}
```

## Module Design Decisions

Below we point out a few Terraform module design decisions we made to reduce friction as others use the module.

### Design Decision #1 - Implementing Integration and Validation Tests

To ensure the Terraform module remains reliable after changes—whether by contributors or automated processes—we've added approximately 20 tests. Thankfully [Terraform](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/configuration-language/test#prerequisites) and [OpenTofu](https://opentofu.org/docs/cli/commands/test/) both include a built-in testing framework that allows us to write tests directly in HCL, replacing the previous Go-based approach. The tests validate that the module behaves as expected and prevent new changes from unintentionally breaking functionality that downstream consumers rely on.

> We'll skip over the happy path tests ([example 1](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation/blob/9b9112a2d3ff0f3d415813a8b4de11cefcab56a9/tests/variables_users.tftest.hcl#L52-L70), [example 2](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation/blob/9b9112a2d3ff0f3d415813a8b4de11cefcab56a9/tests/variables_users.tftest.hcl#L72-L89), [example 3](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-googleworkspace-users-groups-automation/blob/9b9112a2d3ff0f3d415813a8b4de11cefcab56a9/tests/variables_users.tftest.hcl#L140-L157)) we added to validate things like email and password validation, since these basic unit tests can be easily generated using Cursor, GitHub Copilot, or other AI code generation tools.

Reviewer: is it intentional to point to a specific commit here?

Author: Yes. I imagine we'll change the tests in the future and I wanted the content to still make sense after code changes to the tests file.

        role: optional(string, "MEMBER"),
        delivery_settings: optional(string, "ALL_MAIL"),
        type: optional(string, "USER"),
      })), {}),
      primary_email : string,
    }))

    # validate users.groups.[group_key].type
    validation {
      condition = alltrue(flatten([
        for user in var.users: [
          for group in values(try(user.groups, {})): (
            group.type == null || contains(["USER", "GROUP", "CUSTOMER"], upper(group.type))
          )
        ]
      ]))
      error_message = "group type must be either 'USER', 'GROUP', or 'CUSTOMER'"
    }
  }

  run "group_member_type_invalid" {
    command = plan
    providers = {
      googleworkspace = googleworkspace.mock
    }
    variables {
      users = {
        "invalid.type@example.com" = {
          primary_email = "invalid.type@example.com"
          family_name  = "Type"
          given_name   = "Invalid"
          groups = {
            "test-group" = {
              type = "INVALID-TYPE"
            }
          }
        }
      }
      groups = {
        "test-group" = {
          name  = "Test Group"
          email = "test-group@example.com"
        }
      }
    }

>     expect_failures = [var.users]

Reviewer: I'm not familiar with HCL testing, but why is the assertion failure value the `var.users` value? Is it because the variable `users` failed validation?

  }
  ```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

There are N more complex tests, helping us ensure this module won't break in the future.

```

Reviewer: for some value of N.

> ### Design Decision #2 - Choosing Intuitive Terraform Variable Structure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Design Decision #2 - Choosing Intuitive Terraform Variable Structures
```

In the Google Workspace provider, provisioning a group involves declaring two resources: `group` and `group_settings`.

```terraform
resource "googleworkspace_group" "sales" {
  email = "sales@example.com"
}

resource "googleworkspace_group_settings" "sales_settings" {
  email        = googleworkspace_group.sales.email
  who_can_join = "INVITED_CAN_JOIN"
}
```

> This `group` and `group_setting` resource design mirrors Google's Admin SDK REST API structure. However, we felt that group settings more intuitively belonged as a nested attribute inside a group. So in our group variable, we added `settings` and extracted settings in the module's `local` block:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This `group` and `group_setting` resource design mirrors Google's Admin SDK REST API structure. However, we felt that group settings more intuitively belonged as a nested attribute inside a group. So in our group variable, we added `settings`. Then, later, we extracted settings in the module's `local` block to meet the provider's expectations:
```

Reviewer: I think this is what you are doing, ignore me if that is not true.

```terraform
# groups variable declaration
variable "groups" {
  description = "List of groups"
  type = map(object({
    name: string,
    email: string,
    settings: optional(object({
      who_can_join: optional(string),
    }))
  }))
}

# locals block
locals {
  group_settings = {
    for k, v in var.groups : k => merge(v.settings, { email = v.email })
  }
}

# group_settings resource
resource "googleworkspace_group_settings" "defaults" {
  for_each     = local.group_settings
  email        = each.value.email
  who_can_join = "INVITED_CAN_JOIN"
}
```

> Yes, it's an abstraction which can sometimes lead to issues, but we think reducing cognitive friction is worth the added business logic in the Terraform code. Here's an example of a simpler configuration for groups:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Yes, it's an abstraction which can sometimes lead to issues, but we think reducing cognitive friction for the module user is worth the added business logic in the Terraform code. Here's an example of a simpler configuration for groups:
```

```terraform
locals {
  default_group_settings = {
    who_can_join = "ALL_IN_DOMAIN_CAN_JOIN"
  }
}

module "googleworkspace" {
  source  = "masterpointio/users-groups-automation/googleworkspace"
  version = "X.X.X"

  groups = {
    support = {
      name    = "Support"
      email   = "support@example.com"
      settings = merge(local.default_group_settings, {})
    }
    engineers = {
      name    = "Engineering"
      email   = "engineering@example.com"
      settings = merge(local.default_group_settings, {
        who_can_join = "INVITED_CAN_JOIN"
      })
    }
  }
}
```

## Wrapping Up

> With this setup in place and a CODEOWNERS file, we're now transparently, democratically, and securely managing users and groups within Google Workspace. This helps our engineering leader, Matt, avoid having to keep this in his head and enables us as a team to avoid waiting on him. Want access to AWS SSO? Open a PR and get the right approval from the CODEOWNERS, merge it, and automation takes care of the rest. We love this workflow and we hope it's useful to you and your team!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this setup in place and a CODEOWNERS file, we're now transparently, consistently, and securely managing users and groups within Google Workspace. This helps our engineering leader, Matt, avoid having to keep account setup details in his head. It also enables us as a team to avoid waiting on him or any other one person. Want access to AWS SSO? Open a PR and get the right approval from the CODEOWNERS, merge it, and automation takes care of the rest. We love this workflow and we hope it's useful to you and your team!
```

How is it democratic? You just mentioned CODEOWNERS :) 

There are other benefits you allude to up top that might be worth hammering home here beyond saving Matt time:

* consistency of access
* auditability (everything has a trail)

What does this line mean? "Want access to AWS SSO"? This is the first I've heard of AWS SSO in this article. Is that a copy pasta error?

> Want help implementing this terraform module set in your Google Workspace?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Want help automating your Google Workspace configuration with Terraform? Need to make sure your Workspace policies stay consistent and auditable? Want to avoid onboarding chokepoints like Matt used to be?
```

Or similar?

---
visible: true
draft: false
title: "Managing Your Google Workspace with Terraform"
author: Weston Platter
date: 2025-07-14
slug: managing-google-workspace-with-terraform

> description: "Migrate Google Workspace from click-ops to Infrastructure as Code with our open source Terraform module. Includes design patterns and import examples."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: "Migrate Google Workspace from ClickOps to Infrastructure as Code with our open source Terraform module. Includes design patterns and import examples."
```

I think it's more widely known like this 
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/349d87e6-a7a0-404c-8438-ab7a365bee9e)

# image: /img/updates/oss-iac/oss-iac.png
callout: <p>👋 <b>If you're ready to take your infrastructure to the next level, we're here to help. We love to work together with engineering teams to help them build well-documented, scalable, automated IaC that make their jobs easier. <a href='/contact'>Get in touch!</a>
---

## Table of Contents

- [Growing Pains](#growing-pains)
- [Why This Matters for Scaling Teams](#why-this-matters-for-scaling-teams)
- [Managing Google Workspace with Terraform](#managing-google-workspace-with-terraform)
- [Getting Started With the Module](#getting-started-with-the-module)
- [Module Design Decisions](#module-design-decisions)
  - [Implementing Integration and Validation Tests](#design-decision-1---implementing-integration-and-validation-tests)
  - [Choosing Intuitive Terraform Variable Structures](#design-decision-2---choosing-intuitive-terraform-variable-structures)
- [Wrapping Up](#wrapping-up)

## Growing Pains

As Masterpoint has been around for almost 10 years now, we've experienced growing pains transitioning from a one-person consultancy to a team of core full-time engineers, with the help of additional contractors when needed.

> During that time, we've focused on client projects far more than our internal systems. When I joined in December, we started to feel the friction of onboarding a new team member, including adding their Google Workspace account. Matt (our CEO/CTO) had to:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During that time, we've focused on client projects far more than our internal systems. When I joined in December, we started to feel the friction of onboarding a new team member, including adding their [Google Workspace](https://workspace.google.com/) account. Matt (our CEO/CTO) had to:
```

See below, Sorry, I made the suggestion earlier, didn't realize that the below wasn't the first mention of Google Workspace in the article. Moving it higher

- remember what permissions a new Google Workspace user gets by default
- how to provision SSO permissions for Masterpoint's AWS Accounts
- how to get a user set up for client-specific SSOs

Since the last onboarding was about 6 months prior, important details weren't fresh in mind, which resulted in my delayed access to the Masterpoint AWS accounts. In the end, he had to take time and focus away from other work due to these tedious administrative tasks.

## Why This Matters for Scaling Teams

> In our small company and possibly in your own organization, it's not a big deal for the founder or early engineer to create a new employee's [Google Workspace](https://workspace.google.com/) account or give them SSO account access via the Admin UI. But as a company scales:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In our small company and possibly in your own organization, it's not a big deal for the founder or early engineer to create a new employee's Google Workspace account or give them SSO account access via the Admin UI. But as a company scales:
```
Sorry, I made the suggestion earlier, didn't realize that this wasn't the first mention of Google Workspace in the article. Moving it higher

- Founders and engineers are focused on product, customers, and strategy.
- Nobody remembers why or when a permission was changed.
- Group membership becomes inconsistent.
- Onboarding/offboarding gets slower and error-prone.
- The consequences for getting security permissions incorrect increase.

As a company grows past ten, dozens, or a hundred people, teams (and dare we say departments) become more distributed. It is harder to manage user accounts across many different SaaS tools. It's important to have systems in place that provide clarity and enable individuals to get the right access to get their work done in a timely manner. We believe efficient systems are part of a company evolving toward higher levels of organizational maturity.

One aspect of that is finding a better way to manager your Google Workspace accounts.

## Managing Google Workspace with Terraform

> We looked at a couple of open source solutions and decided on using the [Terraform Google Workspace provider](https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform-provider-googleworkspace). We often use SaaS-specific Terraform providers to [provision user accounts for DataDog](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-datadog-users) and other SaaS services, so this was an easy decision.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We looked at a couple of open source solutions and decided on using the [Terraform Google Workspace provider](https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform-provider-googleworkspace). We often use SaaS-specific Terraform providers to [provision user accounts for DataDog](https://github.com/masterpointio/terraform-datadog-users) and other SaaS services, so this was an easy decision.
```

"We often use SaaS-specific Terraform providers to provision user accounts for DataDog and other SaaS services, so this was an easy decision." hmm this sentence feels off?

Author: @oycyc I took a look and revised it a bit. https://github.com/masterpointio/masterpoint.io/pull/66/commits/a724df656da3f3c57fe91d0bdde72525f9a3b3ed. How does this version feel?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, looks great!
